I. Introduction

          --- Characterizing the energy of communication factors: ---

        1) Application determines how many bytes
        are in a packet and at what rate they are being sent. The
        latter depends, among others, on the propagation conditions.

        2) Number of devices in the network effects the
        energy consumption, i.e., increasing traffic eventually will
        cause more collisions.

        3) Position of the devices and the state of
        the communication channel, which determines the path loss and noise.

        4) Communication protocol and radio hardware determine
        how long the radio is active and at what power.

                              --- Improvements: ---

       1) Adaptive Data Rate (ADR) and downlink messages have been included [6][7]

       2) Payload size and packet rate can now be changed to correspond
          with real-life applications, whereas this was fixed in prior work [8]

       3) Energy consumption corresponding to the IoT nodes are based on
          measurements from a power-optimized node [9].

II. LPWAN ASSESSMENT - LORA AND LORAWAN


                             --- LoRa PHY scheme: ---
        LoRa, short for Long Range, is a proprietary modulation technique developed by Cycleo; later
        acquired by Semtech. The modulation technique is based on
        Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS). LoRa encodes information by means of chirps.
        A chirp is a sinusoidal signal whose frequency monotonically increases (upchirp) or
        decreases (downchirp). The symbol duration is based on the
        spreading factor (SF) and the bandwidth (BW).
        Each LoRa symbol is composed of 2^SF chirps each covering the entire
        bandwidth. The symbol duration of a LoRa symbol is defined as:

                                    !!!

        A LoRa message consists of a preamble and data.
        The preamble contains only upchirps while the data part comprises upchirps with discontinuities.
        The position of the discontinuities -in frequency- is what encodes the transmitted information.
        To ensure that multiple packets can be demodulated concurrently, LoRa packets can be encoded with different
        orthogonal spreading factors.

                            --- LoRaWAN MAC scheme: ---

        LoRaWAN defines the multiple access control (MAC) layer and the network architecture.
        Opposed to the proprietary modulation technique LoRa, LoRaWAN is an open
        standard specified by the LoRa Alliance.

        LoRaWAN defines three device classes each targeting different use cases.

        LoRa devices initiate communication by means of transmitting a message to the gateway. By means of confirmed
        messages, the nodes can request acknowledgments to ensure that the packets are successfully received by the gateway.
        After an uplink message, the node opens two slots to receive downlink traffic from the gateway.

        LoRaWAN mandates that each LoRa device implements this scheme:
        The compliant devices are called class A devices.
        Class B and C devices extend the communication capabilities
        of class A devices by defining additional receive slots. Class
        B devices have periodic receive slots while class C devices
        continuously listen for incoming messages.

                        --- Governable parameters: ---

        LoRaWAN facilitates controlling the airtime, data rate and energy consumption of
        LoRa nodes in order to optimize the overall energy consumption of the network.

        This is done by adapting the data rate and transmission power to the propagation characteristics of the
        LoRa link. Increasing the spreading factor results in a higher
        airtime, which allows the receiver to better demodulate the
        message. Despite the better range, a node will consume more
        power when transmitting with a higher spreading factor. In
        addition to modifying the spreading factor, the transmission
        power can be altered to further increase the range or decrease
        the energy consumption.

        LoRaWAN devices need to comply with the regulations
        imposed in the industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio
        bands in which they operate. These regulations include a
        limitation in the duty cycle of transmissions and excited
        transmit power. Concretely, LoRaWAN enforces a per band
        duty-cycle limitation. After transmitting a message, the node
        needs to wait T_{off} seconds before transmitting again in that
        band. Considering the case of sending a message
        with a payload size of 51 bytes and a spreading factor of 12
        and respecting a duty cycle limit of 1%, the time off is 4
        minutes.

                                    !!!

III. CROSS-LAYER ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

        The presented cross-layer simulator (Fig. 1) provides a
        generic framework to evaluate and co-optimize PHY, MAC
        and network parameters under realistic conditions.

        In the framework, each class A Node sends LoRa packets to the
        Air Interface where collision, propagation, and SNR models
        operate on the messages in progress. Finally, the Gateway
        receives and processes the packets. In the case of confirmed
        messages, the gateway will transmit a message in the downlink
        to the corresponding node to acknowledge the received uplink
        message.

                          --- Nodes ---

        Each node is characterized by an energy profile, a set of
        LoRa parameters and a location. The simulator is not constrained to one energy profile.
        Different distinct profiles can be allocated to nodes, mimicking
        various nodes.

        Other power states are taken into account besides transmit, receive
        and sleep. First, simple processing (state 2) is simulated.
        Secondly, the states prior to transmitting and receiving (state 6)
        are related to waking-up and setting up the radio. Finally,
        after receiving a downlink message, the downlink message
        is processed and the MAC-related functionality is executed (state 9).

        The behavior of the node is designed as specified by
        Semtech [12]–[14] and their LoRaWAN node implementation.2
        In spite of the openness of the LoRaWAN MAC
        protocol, not all LoRa-specific documents are publicly accessible.

        The network operator can, to some extent,
        freely define the network’s behavior. In our assessment, this
        functionality is based on the open-source implementation of
        The Things Network.3

        In order to optimize the energy budget of LoRa class
        A nodes, a downlink message can only be received after
        transmitting an uplink message. Hence, the LoRa nodes only
        need to listen to incoming messages at specific times. As
        previously mentioned, Class A LoRaWAN devices [1] utilize
        two receive windows.

        The data rate and center frequency of the downlink messages
        depends on the used receive window, the data rate and center frequency of the uplink message.

        By default, the downlink message scheduled for the first receive
        window (RX 1) uses the same frequency and data rate as
        the uplink message. In the second receive window (RX 2),
        a fixed predefined frequency and data rate are being used.

        In the case a downlink message was received in RX 1,
        the node will not use the second receive slot.

        In RX 2, Semtech defines a spreading factor of 12 while in
        our assessment we prefer the SF9 as proposed by The Things
        Network. As a lower spreading factor is favored because the
        base station can transmitted with higher power. The lower
        spreading factor results in a faster reception, which in turn
        yields a lower energy consumption at the node. A channel
        frequency of 868.525 MHz was selected for RX 2; conform
        to The Things Network.

        The channel frequency of the uplink packets are selected
        on basis of the channel availability. The end-device chooses
        a channel with the lowest Toff (Eq. 2). The device respects
        the duty cycle regulations and waits to transmit a message if
        the required Toff is not satisfied. A default transmission rate
        (λ) of 0.02 bits per second is chosen which is equivalent to
        transmitting a 9 byte message every hour.

                          --- Air Interface ---

        The air interface includes three main components. First,
        the propagation channel introduces a path loss. Secondly, a
        simple SNR model is provided to translate the Received Signal
        Strength (RSS) to an SNR value. Finally, a collision model
        determines the collided packets, which occurs particularly in
        the uplink in a typical LPWAN case.

        1) Propagation Model: Currently, the framework features
           two channel models. First, a log-distance channel model with
           shadowing is provided, where the path loss is characterized
           by:

                                    !!!

           An additional path loss can be included in the log-distance
           model to simulate indoor positioned nodes and gateways to
           accommodate for the additional path loss [16] due to the
           penetration of a building. Secondly, a COST 231 model [17]
           implementation can be used to model specific scenarios.

           2) SNR Model: The current version of the simulator takes
           into account the noise floor, as described in [12]. In future
           extensions more complex models can be included and interference could be added.

           3) Collision Model: The collision model considers the center frequency,
           spreading factor, timing and power to determine whether packets collide.
           The model is based on the findings reported in [6].
           Due to the orthogonality of the specified spreading factors,
           two messages encoded with different spreading factors can be demodulated concurrently without colliding

                          --- Gateway ---

        This LoRa concentrator is able to
        receive up to eight packets simultaneously sent with different
        spreading factors on different channels. A message can be
        received by the gateway if it has not collided and the signal
        strength is higher than the sensitivity of the gateway [18],
        [19].

        After demodulating the received message, the network
        executes Adaptive Data Rate (ADR) –if enabled– following
        a mechanism inspired by the implementation of The Things
        Network.4 According to the ADR specification, the network is
        capable of increasing the data rate and changing the transmit
        power of the node, while the nodes can only decrease their data
        rate.

        This can result in a low power transmit trap where nodes
        are no longer capable of communicating with the gateway [4].
        Depending on the MAC LoRaWAN parameters of the uplink
        message, the gateway responds with a downlink message. We
        currently assume that every scheduled downlink message will
        be received by the end-device considering gateways have a
        higher permitted transmit power.

        The gateway will first try to schedule a message in the receive slot which requires
        less energy. For instance, if a message with SF12 was sent,
        the gateway will try to schedule a downlink message on the
        second receive slot with SF9 opposed to the first receive slot
        with SF12, in order to save significant air time, and hence,
        energy. We measured an energy gain of four when utilizing this
        approach compared to using the first receive slot. This is one
        of the cross-layer energy optimizations already implemented
        in present networks.



